My name is Max, I am 22 years old. Nice to meet you!
I was born in Moldova, by nationality - Bulgarian. After I turned 18, I decided to move to Bulgaria
to work and study independently of my parents.
I started from scratch, as an assistant cook. Also, I've always been interested in technology,
which has served me very well.
At the time of the COVID pandemic, when there was no work at all, I developed exactly in this field of activity -
I was engaged in repairing phones, laptops and computers.
It was with this that I was able to pay for my accommodation and have money for food.
After the fall of the restrictive measures to the establishments,
I am again returning to the industry, where I already have good success.
I would like to connect my life with information technology, which I am taking steps towards.
Now I have finally made up my mind and headed to a university where
I will study by correspondence so that I can also work.
I am moving towards my goal - to become an IT specialist and I am not giving up!

Education.
Cybersecurity Informational Technologies
Military Academy ''G.S. Rakovski" - Sofia
When choosing a higher education, I focused on prestige and quality, so I chose Georgi Rakovski Military Academy.
During the training process, we consider the fundamental problems of security
in cyberspace, and we also have many accreditations in this area.
We also do not depart from the natural sciences, such as physics and mathematics, and also focus on programming in C++.
2019
Programming & QA Technologies Informational Technologies CEITI - Chisinau, Moldova
After elementary school, I entered here in the 10th grade. Since this is a college, I had the opportunity
to get a secondary education along with a profession.
The idea was wonderful, given my interest in technology.
But at one point, on my 18th birthday, I decide that I no longer want to depend on my parents
and leave for Bulgaria (since this is my historical homeland) in order to be self-sufficient.
Here I acquired skills in languages such as C++, Java, SQL, markup languages (HTML, CSS)