HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES.


CHAPTER I.


ACCORDING to the census of 1800, the United States of America
contained 5,308,483 persons. In the same year the British Islands
contained upwards of fifteen millions; the French Republic, more than
twenty-seven millions. Nearly one fifth of the American people were
negro slaves; the true political population consisted of four and a
half million free whites, or less than one million able-bodied males,
on whose shoulders fell the burden of a continent. Even after two
centuries of struggle the land was still untamed; forest covered every
portion, except here and there a strip of cultivated soil; the minerals
lay undisturbed in their rocky beds, and more than two thirds of the
people clung to the seaboard within fifty miles of tide-water, where
alone the wants of civilized life could be supplied. The centre of
population rested within eighteen miles of Baltimore, north and east of
Washington. Except in political arrangement, the interior was little
more civilized than in 1750, and was not much easier to penetrate than
when La Salle and Hennepin found their way to the Mississippi more than
a century before.

A great exception broke this rule. Two wagon-roads crossed the
Alleghany Mountains in Pennsylvania,--one leading from Philadelphia
to Pittsburg; one from the Potomac to the Monongahela; while a third
passed through Virginia southwestward to the Holston River and
Knoxville in Tennessee, with a branch through the Cumberland Gap
into Kentucky. By these roads and by trails less passable from North
and South Carolina, or by water-ways from the lakes, between four
and five hundred thousand persons had invaded the country beyond the
Alleghanies. At Pittsburg and on the Monongahela existed a society,
already old, numbering seventy or eighty thousand persons, while on the
Ohio River the settlements had grown to an importance which threatened
to force a difficult problem on the union of the older States. One
hundred and eighty thousand whites, with forty thousand negro slaves,
made Kentucky the largest community west of the mountains; and about
ninety thousand whites and fourteen thousand slaves were scattered over
Tennessee. In the territory north of the Ohio less progress had been
made. A New England colony existed at Marietta; some fifteen thousand
people were gathered at Cincinnati; half-way between the two, a small
town had grown up at Chillicothe, and other villages or straggling
cabins were to be found elsewhere; but the whole Ohio territory
contained only forty-five thousand inhabitants. The entire population,
both free and slave, west of the mountains, reached not yet half a
million; but already they were partly disposed to think themselves, and
the old thirteen States were not altogether unwilling to consider them,
the germ of an independent empire, which was to find its outlet, not
through the Alleghanies to the seaboard, but by the Mississippi River
to the Gulf.

Nowhere did eastern settlements touch the western. At least one hundred
miles of mountainous country held the two regions everywhere apart.
The shore of Lake Erie, where alone contact seemed easy, was still
unsettled. The Indians had been pushed back to the Cuyahoga River,
and a few cabins were built on the site of Cleveland; but in 1800, as
in 1700, this intermediate region was only a portage where emigrants
and merchandise were transferred from Lake Erie to the Muskingum and
Ohio valleys. Even western New York remained a wilderness: Buffalo was
not laid out; Indian titles were not extinguished; Rochester did not
exist; and the county of Onondaga numbered a population of less than
eight thousand. In 1799 Utica contained fifty houses, mostly small
and temporary. Albany was still a Dutch city, with some five thousand
inhabitants; and the tide of immigration flowed slowly through it into
the valley of the Mohawk, while another stream from Pennsylvania,
following the Susquehanna, spread toward the Genesee country.

The people of the old thirteen States, along the Atlantic seaboard,
thus sent westward a wedge-shaped mass of nearly half a million
persons, penetrating by the Tennessee, Cumberland, and Ohio rivers
toward the western limit of the Union. The Indians offered sharp
resistance to this invasion, exacting life for life, and yielding only
as their warriors perished. By the close of the century the wedge of
white settlements, with its apex at Nashville and its flanks covered
by the Ohio and Tennessee rivers, nearly split the Indian country in
halves. The northern half--consisting of the later States of Wisconsin,
Michigan, Illinois, Indiana, and one third of Ohio--contained
Wyandottes and Shawanese, Miamis, Kickapoos, and other tribes, able
to send some five thousand warriors to hunt or fight. In the southern
half, powerful confederacies of Creeks, Cherokees, Chickasaws, and
Choctaws lived and hunted where the States of Mississippi, Alabama, and
the western parts of Georgia, Tennessee, and Kentucky were to extend;
and so weak was the State of Georgia, which claimed the southwestern
territory for its own, that a well-concerted movement of Indians
might without much difficulty have swept back its white population of
one hundred thousand toward the ocean or across the Savannah River.
The Indian power had been broken in halves, but each half was still
terrible to the colonists on the edges of their vast domain, and was
used as a political weapon by the Governments whose territory bounded
the Union on the north and south. The governors-general of Canada
intrigued with the northwestern Indians, that they might hold in check
any aggression from Washington; while the Spanish governors of West
Florida and Louisiana maintained equally close relations with the
Indian confederacies of the Georgia territory.

With the exception that half a million people had crossed the
Alleghanies and were struggling with difficulties all their own, in an
isolation like that of Jutes or Angles in the fifth century, America,
so far as concerned physical problems, had changed little in fifty
years. The old landmarks remained nearly where they stood before. The
same bad roads and difficult rivers, connecting the same small towns,
stretched into the same forests in 1800 as when the armies of Braddock
and Amherst pierced the western and northern wilderness, except that
these roads extended a few miles farther from the sea-coast. Nature was
rather man’s master than his servant, and the five million Americans
struggling with the untamed continent seemed hardly more competent
to their task than the beavers and buffalo which had for countless
generations made bridges and roads of their own.

Even by water, along the seaboard, communication was as slow and almost
as irregular as in colonial times. The wars in Europe caused a sudden
and great increase in American shipping employed in foreign commerce,
without yet leading to general improvement in navigation. The ordinary
sea-going vessel carried a freight of about two hundred and fifty
tons; the largest merchant ships hardly reached four hundred tons;
the largest frigate in the United States navy, the “line-of-battle
ship in disguise,” had a capacity of fifteen hundred and seventy-six
tons. Elaborately rigged as ships or brigs, the small merchant craft
required large crews and were slow sailers; but the voyage to Europe
was comparatively more comfortable and more regular than the voyage
from New York to Albany, or through Long Island Sound to Providence.
No regular packet plied between New York and Albany. Passengers
waited till a sloop was advertised to sail; they provided their own
bedding and supplies; and within the nineteenth century Captain Elias
Bunker won much fame by building the sloop “Experiment,” of one
hundred and ten tons, to start regularly on a fixed day for Albany,
for the convenience of passengers only, supplying beds, wine, and
provisions for the voyage of one hundred and fifty miles. A week on the
North River or on the Sound was an experience not at all unknown to
travellers.

While little improvement had been made in water-travel, every increase
of distance added to the difficulties of the westward journey. The
settler who after buying wagon and horses hauled his family and goods
across the mountains, might buy or build a broad flat-bottomed ark,
to float with him and his fortunes down the Ohio, in constant peril
of upsetting or of being sunk; but only light boats with strong
oars could mount the stream, or boats forced against the current by
laboriously poling in shallow water. If he carried his tobacco and
wheat down the Mississippi to the Spanish port of New Orleans, and
sold it, he might return to his home in Kentucky or Ohio by a long and
dangerous journey on horseback through the Indian country from Natchez
to Nashville, or he might take ship to Philadelphia, if a ship were
about to sail, and again cross the Alleghanies. Compared with river
travel, the sea was commonly an easy and safe highway. Nearly all the
rivers which penetrated the interior were unsure, liable to be made
dangerous by freshets, and both dangerous and impassable by drought;
yet such as they were, these streams made the main paths of traffic.
Through the mountainous gorges of the Susquehanna the produce of
western New York first found an outlet; the Cuyahoga and Muskingum were
the first highway from the Lakes to the Ohio; the Ohio itself, with its
great tributaries the Cumberland and the Tennessee, marked the lines
of western migration; and every stream which could at high water float
a boat was thought likely to become a path for commerce. As General
Washington, not twenty years earlier, hoped that the brawling waters of
the Cheat and Youghiogheny might become the channel of trade between
Chesapeake Bay and Pittsburg, so the Americans of 1800 were prepared to
risk life and property on any streamlet that fell foaming down either
flank of the Alleghanies. The experience of mankind proved trade to be
dependent on water communications, and as yet Americans did not dream
that the experience of mankind was useless to them.

If America was to be developed along the lines of water communication
alone, by such means as were known to Europe, Nature had decided that
the experiment of a single republican government must meet extreme
difficulties. The valley of the Ohio had no more to do with that of the
Hudson, the Susquehanna, the Potomac, the Roanoke, and the Santee, than
the valley of the Danube with that of the Rhone, the Po, or the Elbe.
Close communication by land could alone hold the great geographical
divisions together either in interest or in fear. The union of New
England with New York and Pennsylvania was not an easy task even as a
problem of geography, and with an ocean highway; but the union of New
England with the Carolinas, and of the sea-coast with the interior,
promised to be a hopeless undertaking. Physical contact alone could
make one country of these isolated empires, but to the patriotic
American of 1800, struggling for the continued existence of an embryo
nation, with machinery so inadequate, the idea of ever bringing the
Mississippi River, either by land or water, into close contact with Now
England, must have seemed wild. By water, an Erie Canal was already
foreseen; by land, centuries of labor could alone conquer those
obstacles which Nature permitted to be overcome.

In the minds of practical men, the experience of Europe left few
doubts on this point. After two thousand years of public labor and
private savings, even despotic monarchs, who employed the resources of
their subjects as they pleased, could in 1800 pass from one part of
their European dominions to another little more quickly than they might
have done in the age of the Antonines. A few short canals had been
made, a few bridges had been built, an excellent post-road extended
from Madrid to St. Petersburg; but the heavy diligence that rumbled
from Calais to Paris required three days for its journey of one hundred
and fifty miles, and if travellers ventured on a trip to Marseilles
they met with rough roads and hardships like those of the Middle Ages.
Italy was in 1800 almost as remote from the north of Europe as when
carriage-roads were first built. Neither in time nor in thought was
Florence or Rome much nearer to London in Wordsworth’s youth than in
the youth of Milton or Gray. Indeed, such changes as had occurred were
partly for the worse, owing to the violence of revolutionary wars
during the last ten years of the eighteenth century. Horace Walpole at
his life’s close saw about him a world which in many respects was less
civilized than when as a boy he made the grand tour of Europe.

While so little had been done on the great highways of European
travel, these highways were themselves luxuries which furnished no
sure measure of progress. The post-horses toiled as painfully as ever
through the sand from Hamburg to Berlin, while the coach between York
and London rolled along an excellent road at the rate of ten miles an
hour; yet neither in England nor on the Continent was the post-road a
great channel of commerce. No matter how good the road, it could not
compete with water, nor could heavy freights in great quantities be
hauled long distances without extravagant cost. Water communication
was as necessary for European commerce in 1800 as it had been for the
Phœnicians and Egyptians; the Rhine, the Rhone, the Danube, the Elbe,
were still the true commercial highways, and except for government
post-roads, Europe was as dependent on these rivers in the eighteenth
century as in the thirteenth. No certainty could be offered of more
rapid progress in the coming century than in the past; the chief hope
seemed to lie in the construction of canals.

While Europe had thus consumed centuries in improving paths of trade,
until merchandise could be brought by canal a few score miles from the
Rhone to the Loire and Seine, to the Garonne and the Rhine, and while
all her wealth and energy had not yet united the Danube with other
river systems, America was required to construct, without delay, at
least three great roads and canals, each several hundred miles long,
across mountain ranges, through a country not yet inhabited, to points
where no great markets existed,--and this under constant peril of
losing her political union, which could not even by such connections
be with certainty secured. After this should be accomplished, the
Alleghanies must still remain between the eastern and western States,
and at any known rate of travel Nashville could not be reached in
less than a fortnight or three weeks from Philadelphia. Meanwhile
the simpler problem of bringing New England nearer to Virginia and
Georgia had not advanced even with the aid of a direct ocean highway.
In becoming politically independent of England, the old thirteen
provinces developed little more commercial intercourse with each other
in proportion to their wealth and population than they had maintained
in colonial days. The material ties that united them grew in strength
no more rapidly than the ties which bound them to Europe. Each group of
States lived a life apart.

Even the lightly equipped traveller found a short journey no slight
effort. Between Boston and New York was a tolerable highway, along
which, thrice a week, light stage-coaches carried passengers and
the mail, in three days. From New York a stage-coach started every
week-day for Philadelphia, consuming the greater part of two days in
the journey; and the road between Paulus Hook, the modern Jersey City,
and Hackensack, was declared by the newspapers in 1802 to be as bad
as any other part of the route between Maine and Georgia. South of
Philadelphia the road was tolerable as far as Baltimore, but between
Baltimore and the new city of Washington it meandered through forests;
the driver chose the track which seemed least dangerous, and rejoiced
if in wet seasons he reached Washington without miring or upsetting his
wagon. In the Northern States, four miles an hour was the average speed
for any coach between Bangor and Baltimore. Beyond the Potomac the
roads became steadily worse, until south of Petersburg even the mails
were carried on horseback. Except for a stage-coach which plied between
Charleston and Savannah, no public conveyance of any kind was mentioned
in the three southernmost States.

The stage-coach was itself a rude conveyance, of a kind still familiar
to experienced travellers. Twelve persons, crowded into one wagon,
were jolted over rough roads, their bags and parcels, thrust inside,
cramping their legs, while they were protected from the heat and
dust of mid-summer and the intense cold and driving snow of winter
only by leather flaps buttoned to the roof and sides. In fine, dry
weather this mode of travel was not unpleasant, when compared with
the heavy vehicles of Europe and the hard English turnpikes; but when
spring rains drew the frost from the ground the roads became nearly
impassable, and in winter, when the rivers froze, a serious peril was
added, for the Susquehanna or the North River at Paulus Hook must
be crossed in an open boat,--an affair of hours at best, sometimes
leading to fatal accidents. Smaller annoyances of many kinds were
habitual. The public, as a rule, grumbled less than might have been
expected, but occasionally newspapers contained bitter complaints. An
angry Philadelphian, probably a foreigner, wrote in 1796 that, “with
a few exceptions, brutality, negligence, and filching are as naturally
expected by people accustomed to travelling in America, as a mouth,
a nose, and two eyes are looked for in a man’s face.” This sweeping
charge, probably unjust, and certainly supported by little public
evidence, was chiefly founded on the experience of an alleged journey
from New York:--

 “At Bordentown we went into a second boat where we met with very
 sorry accommodation. This was about four o’clock in the afternoon. We
 had about twenty miles down the Delaware to reach Philadelphia. The
 captain, who had a most provoking tongue, was a boy about eighteen
 years of age. He and a few companions despatched a dozen or eighteen
 bottles of porter. We ran three different times against other vessels
 that were coming up the stream. The women and children lay all night
 on the bare boards of the cabin floor.... We reached Arch Street
 wharf about eight o’clock on the Wednesday morning, having been about
 sixteen hours on a voyage of twenty miles.”

In the Southern States the difficulties and perils of travel were so
great as to form a barrier almost insuperable. Even Virginia was no
exception to this rule. At each interval of a few miles the horseman
found himself stopped by a river, liable to sudden freshets, and rarely
bridged. Jefferson in his frequent journeys between Monticello and
Washington was happy to reach the end of the hundred miles without
some vexatious delay. “Of eight rivers between here and Washington,” he
wrote to his Attorney-General in 1801, “five have neither bridges nor
boats.”

Expense caused an equally serious obstacle to travel. The usual charge
in the Northern States was six cents a mile by stage. In the year
1796, according to Francis Baily, President of the Royal Astronomical
Society, three or four stages ran daily from Baltimore to Philadelphia,
the fare six dollars, with charges amounting to two dollars and a
quarter a day at the inns on the road. Baily was three days in making
the journey. From Philadelphia to New York he paid the same fare and
charges, arriving in one day and a half. The entire journey of two
hundred miles cost him twenty-one dollars. He remarked that travelling
on the main lines of road in the settled country was about as expensive
as in England, and when the roads were good, about as rapid. Congress
allowed its members six dollars for every twenty miles travelled. The
actual cost, including hotel expenses, could hardly have fallen below
ten cents a mile.

Heavy traffic never used stage routes if it could find cheaper.
Commerce between one State and another, or even between the seaboard
and the interior of the same State, was scarcely possible on any large
scale unless navigable water connected them. Except the great highway
to Pittsburg, no road served as a channel of commerce between different
regions of the country. In this respect New England east of the
Connecticut was as independent of New York as both were independent
of Virginia, and as Virginia in her turn was independent of Georgia
and South Carolina. The chief value of inter-State communication by
land rested in the postal system; but the post furnished another
illustration of the difficulties which barred progress. In the year
1800 one general mail-route extended from Portland in Maine to
Louisville in Georgia, the time required for the trip being twenty
days. Between New York and Petersburg in Virginia was a daily service;
between New York and Boston, and also between Petersburg and Augusta,
the mail was carried thrice a week. Branching from the main line at
New York, a mail went to Canandaigua in ten days; from Philadelphia
another branch line went to Lexington in sixteen days, to Nashville in
twenty-two days. Thus more than twenty thousand miles of post-road,
with nine hundred post-offices, proved the vastness of the country and
the smallness of the result; for the gross receipts for postage in the
year ending Oct. 1, 1801, were only $320,000.

Throughout the land the eighteenth century ruled supreme. Only within
a few years had the New Englander begun to abandon his struggle with
a barren soil, among granite hills, to learn the comforts of easier
existence in the valleys of the Mohawk and Ohio; yet the New England
man was thought the shrewdest and most enterprising of Americans.
If the Puritans and the Dutch needed a century or more to reach the
Mohawk, when would they reach the Mississippi? The distance from New
York to the Mississippi was about one thousand miles; from Washington
to the extreme southwestern military post, below Natchez, was about
twelve hundred. Scarcely a portion of western Europe was three hundred
miles distant from some sea, but a width of three hundred miles was
hardly more than an outskirt of the United States. No civilized country
had yet been required to deal with physical difficulties so serious,
nor did experience warrant conviction that such difficulties could be
overcome.

       *       *       *       *       *

If the physical task which lay before the American people had advanced
but a short way toward completion, little more change could be seen
in the economical conditions of American life. The man who in the
year 1800 ventured to hope for a new era in the coming century, could
lay his hand on no statistics that silenced doubt. The machinery of
production showed no radical difference from that familiar to ages
long past. The Saxon farmer of the eighth century enjoyed most of
the comforts known to Saxon farmers of the eighteenth. The eorls
and ceorls of Offa and Ecgbert could not read or write, and did not
receive a weekly newspaper with such information as newspapers in that
age could supply; yet neither their houses, their clothing, their
food and drink, their agricultural tools and methods, their stock,
nor their habits were so greatly altered or improved by time that
they would have found much difficulty in accommodating their lives to
that of their descendants in the eighteenth century. In this respect
America was backward. Fifty or a hundred miles inland more than half
the houses were log-cabins, which might or might not enjoy the luxury
of a glass window. Throughout the South and West houses showed little
attempt at luxury; but even in New England the ordinary farmhouse was
hardly so well built, so spacious, or so warm as that of a well-to-do
contemporary of Charlemagne. The cloth which the farmer’s family wore
was still homespun. The hats were manufactured by the village hatter;
the clothes were cut and made at home; the shirts, socks, and nearly
every other article of dress were also home-made. Hence came a marked
air of rusticity which distinguished country from town,--awkward shapes
of hat, coat, and trousers, which gave to the Yankee caricature those
typical traits that soon disappeared almost as completely as coats of
mail and steel headpieces. The plough was rude and clumsy; the sickle
as old as Tubal Cain, and even the cradle not in general use; the
flail was unchanged since the Aryan exodus; in Virginia, grain was
still commonly trodden out by horses. Enterprising gentlemen-farmers
introduced threshing-machines and invented scientific ploughs; but
these were novelties. Stock was as a rule not only unimproved, but ill
cared for. The swine ran loose; the cattle were left to feed on what
pasture they could find, and even in New England were not housed until
the severest frosts, on the excuse that exposure hardened them. Near
half a century afterward a competent judge asserted that the general
treatment of cows in New England was fair matter of presentment by
a grand jury. Except among the best farmers, drainage, manures, and
rotation of crops were uncommon. The ordinary cultivator planted his
corn as his father had planted it, sowing as much rye to the acre,
using the same number of oxen to plough, and getting in his crops on
the same day. He was even known to remove his barn on account of the
manure accumulated round it, although the New England soil was never so
rich as to warrant neglect to enrich it. The money for which he sold
his wheat and chickens was of the Old World; he reckoned in shillings
or pistareens, and rarely handled an American coin more valuable than a
large copper cent.

At a time when the wealth and science of London and Paris could
not supply an article so necessary as a common sulphur-match, the
backwardness of remote country districts could hardly be exaggerated.
Yet remote districts were not the only sufferers. Of the whole United
States New England claimed to be the most civilized province, yet
New England was a region in which life had yet gained few charms of
sense and few advantages over its rivals. Wilson, the ornithologist, a
Pennsylvania Scotchman, a confirmed grumbler, but a shrewd judge, and
the most thorough of American travellers, said in 1808: “My journey
through almost the whole of New England has rather lowered the Yankees
in my esteem. Except a few neat academies, I found their schoolhouses
equally ruinous and deserted with ours; fields covered with stones;
stone fences; scrubby oaks and pine-trees; wretched orchards; scarcely
one grain-field in twenty miles; the taverns along the road dirty,
and filled with loungers brawling about lawsuits and politics; the
people snappish and extortioners, lazy, and two hundred years behind
the Pennsylvanians in agricultural improvements.” The description
was exaggerated, for Wilson forgot to speak of the districts where
fields were not covered with stones, and where wheat could be grown to
advantage. Twenty years earlier, Albert Gallatin, who knew Pennsylvania
well, having reached Hartford on his way to Boston, wrote: “I have
seen nothing in America equal to the establishments on the Connecticut
River.” Yet Wilson’s account described the first general effect of
districts in the New England States, where agriculture was backward
and the country poor. The houses were thin wooden buildings, not
well suited to the climate; the churches were unwarmed; the clothing
was poor; sanitary laws were few, and a bathroom or a soil-pipe was
unknown. Consumption, typhoid, scarlet fever, diphtheria, and rheumatic
fevers were common; habits of drinking were still a scourge in every
family, and dyspepsia destroyed more victims than were consumed by
drink. Population increased slowly, as though the conditions of life
were more than usually hard. A century earlier, Massachusetts was
supposed to contain sixty thousand inhabitants. Governor Hutchinson
complained that while the other colonies quadrupled their numbers,
Massachusetts failed to double its population in fifty years. In 1790
the State contained 378,000 people, not including the province of
Maine; in 1800 the number rose to 423,000, which showed that a period
of more rapid growth had begun, for the emigration into other States
was also large.

A better measure of the difficulties with which New England struggled
was given by the progress of Boston, which was supposed to have
contained about eighteen thousand inhabitants as early as 1730, and
twenty thousand in 1770. For several years after the Revolution it
numbered less than twenty thousand, but in 1800 the census showed
twenty-five thousand inhabitants. In appearance, Boston resembled an
English market-town, of a kind even then old-fashioned. The footways or
sidewalks were paved, like the crooked and narrow streets, with round
cobblestones, and were divided from the carriage way only by posts and
a gutter. The streets were almost unlighted at night, a few oil-lamps
rendering the darkness more visible and the rough pavement rougher.
Police hardly existed. The system of taxation was defective. The town
was managed by selectmen, the elected instruments of town-meetings
whose jealousy of granting power was even greater than their objection
to spending money, and whose hostility to city government was not to be
overcome.

Although on all sides increase of ease and comfort was evident, and
roads, canals, and new buildings, public and private, were already in
course of construction on a scale before unknown, yet in spite of more
than a century and a half of incessant industry, intelligent labor,
and pinching economy Boston and New England were still poor. A few
merchants enjoyed incomes derived from foreign trade, which allowed
them to imitate in a quiet way the style of the English mercantile
class; but the clergy and the lawyers, who stood at the head of
society, lived with much economy. Many a country clergyman, eminent for
piety and even for hospitality, brought up a family and laid aside some
savings on a salary of five hundred dollars a year. President Dwight,
who knew well the class to which he belonged, eulogizing the life of
Abijah Weld, pastor of Attleborough, declared that on a salary of two
hundred and twenty dollars a year Mr. Weld brought up eleven children,
besides keeping a hospitable house and maintaining charity to the poor.

On the Exchange a few merchants had done most of the business of Boston
since the peace of 1783, but a mail thrice a week to New York, and an
occasional arrival from Europe or the departure of a ship to China,
left ample leisure for correspondence and even for gossip. The habits
of the commercial class had not been greatly affected by recent
prosperity. Within ten or fifteen years before 1800 three Banks had
been created to supply the commercial needs of Boston. One of these
was a branch Bank of the United States, which employed there whatever
part of its capital it could profitably use; the two others were local
Banks, with capital of $1,600,000, toward which the State subscribed
$400,000. Altogether the banking capital of Boston might amount to two
millions and a half. A number of small Banks, representing in all about
two and a half millions more, were scattered through the smaller New
England towns. The extraordinary prosperity caused by the French wars
opened to Boston a new career. Wealth and population were doubling; the
exports and imports of New England were surprisingly large, and the
shipping was greater than that of New York and Pennsylvania combined;
but Boston had already learned, and was to learn again, how fleeting
were the riches that depended on foreign commerce, and conservative
habits were not easily changed by a few years of accidental gain.

Of manufactures New England had many, but none on a large scale. The
people could feed or clothe themselves only by household industry;
their whale-oil, salt fish, lumber, and rum were mostly sent abroad;
but they freighted coasters with turners’ articles, home-made linens
and cloths, cheese, butter, shoes, nails, and what were called Yankee
Notions of all sorts, which were sent to Norfolk and the Southern
ports, and often peddled from the deck, as goods of every sort were
peddled on the flat-boats of the Ohio. Two or three small mills
spun cotton with doubtful success; but England supplied ordinary
manufactures more cheaply and better than Massachusetts could hope
to do. A tri-weekly mail and a few coasting sloops provided for the
business of New England with domestic ports. One packet sloop plied
regularly to New York.

The State of New York was little in advance of Massachusetts and Maine.
In 1800 for the first time New York gained the lead in population by
the difference between 589,000 and 573,000. The valuation of New York
for the direct tax in 1799 was $100,000,000; that of Massachusetts was
$84,000,000. New York was still a frontier State, and although the city
was European in its age and habits, travellers needed to go few miles
from the Hudson in order to find a wilderness like that of Ohio and
Tennessee. In most material respects the State was behind New England;
outside the city was to be seen less wealth and less appearance of
comfort. The first impression commonly received of any new country was
from its inns, and on the whole few better tests of material condition
then existed. President Dwight, though maintaining that the best
old-fashioned inns of New England were in their way perfect, being in
fact excellent private houses, could not wholly approve what he called
the modern inns, even in Connecticut; but when he passed into New
York he asserted that everything suffered an instant change for the
worse. He explained that in Massachusetts the authorities were strict
in refusing licenses to any but respectable and responsible persons,
whereas in New York licenses were granted to any one who would pay for
them,--which caused a multiplication of dram-shops, bad accommodations,
and a gathering of loafers and tipplers about every tavern porch,
whose rude appearance, clownish manners, drunkenness, swearing, and
obscenity confirmed the chief of Federalist clergymen in his belief
that democracy had an evil influence on morals.
